funding for this program, is provided by Additional funding provided by. This is a course about Justice and we begin with a story suppose. You're the driver of a trolley car and your trolley car is hurtling down the track at 60 miles an hour. And at the end of the track, you notice 5 workers, working on the track. You tried to stop but you can't, your brakes don't work. You feel desperate because you know that if you crash into these five workers, they will all die. Let's assume you know that for sure. And show you feel helpless and tell you notice that there is off to the right beside track and at the end of that track, there's one worker working on the crack, your steering wheel works. So you can turn the trolley car if you want to under the side track. killing 21, but sparing the pie Here's our first question. What's the right thing to do. What would you do? Let's take a poll. How many would turn the trolley car under the side track? Raise your hands. How many wouldn't? How many would go straight ahead? Keep your hands off. Those of you. Who'd go straight ahead. A handful of people would the vast majority would turn. Let's hear first. Now, we need to begin to investigate the reasons why you think. It's the right thing to do. Let's begin with those in the majority who would turn to go into the side track. Why would you do it? What would be your reason who's willing to volunteer a reason? Go ahead stand-up because it it can't be right to kill five people. When you can only kill one person and set It wouldn't be right to kill 5, if you could kill one person instead. That's a good reason, that's a good reason. Who else does everybody agree with that reason? Go ahead. Well, I think it's the same reason on 9/11. We were God, the people who, who flew the plane into the Pennsylvania field as Heroes because they chose to kill the people in the plane and not kill more people in the big buildings. So, the principal there with the same on 911, the tragic circumstance, but better to kill one in so that 5 can live. Is that the reason most of you had those of you who would turn? Yes. let's hear now from those in the minority, those who wouldn't turn yes, I think that's the same type of mentality that justifies genocide and totalitarianism in order to stay save one type of race you wipe out the other So, what would you do in this case? You would to avoid The horrors of genocide, you would crash into the five and kill them. Presumably yes. Yeah. Okay. Who else? It's a brave answer. Thank you. Let's consider another trolley car case. And see what weather. Those of you in the majority. Why do adhere to the principle? Better that one should die so that five should live this time. You're not the driver of the trolley car. You're in onlooker You're standing on a bridge, overlooking, a colic car track. And down the track. Comes a trolley car at the end of the track or five workers. The brakes don't work. The trolley car is about to Korean into the five and kill them. And now you're not the driver, you really feel helpless until you notice standing next to you, Leaning over. The bridge is a very fat man. and, you could give him a shot of He would fall over the bridge under the track. Right in the way of the trolley car he would die but he would spare the five. Now. How many would push the fat man over the bridge? Raise your hand? How many wouldn't? Most people wouldn't. Here's the obvious question. What became of the principal? Better to save five lives, even if it means sacrificing, one life became of the principal that almost everyone indoors. In the first case, I need to hear from someone who is in the majority, in both cases, how do you explain the difference between the two? Yes, the second one, I guess, involves an active choice of pushing a person down, which, I guess the that person himself would otherwise, not have been involved in the situation at all. And so to choose on his behalf, I guess to involve him in something that he otherwise would have escaped is some, I guess more than what you have in the first case, where the three parties said the driver. And that the two sets of workers are already, I guess in the situation, but that guy working the one on the track off to the side. He didn't choose to sacrifice his life. Any more than the Pac-Man did, did he? That's true. But he was on the track and Go ahead. You can come back if you want. All right. It's a hard question. You did. Well, you did very well. It's a hard question. Who else can find a way of reconciling? The reaction of the majority in these two cases? Yes. Well, I guess in the first case, where you have the one worker in the five, it's a choice between those two and a half to make certain choice. And people are going to die because of the trolley car, not necessarily because of your direct actions. The trolley cars are runaway thing and you're making it a split. Second choice or as pushing the fat man over is an actual act murder on your part. You have control over that rise, you may not have control over the trolley car. So I think it's a slightly different situation. All right, who has the reply is that is now? That's that's good. Who has her way? Who wants to reply? Is that a way out of this? I don't think that's a very good reason because you choose to it's either way, you have to choose who dies because you either choose to turn and killed a person, which is an act of conscious thought to turn or you choose to pushed that man over which is also an active conscious action. So either way, you're making a choice Do you want to reply? Well, I'm not really sure if that's the case. It just still seems kind of different to active actually pushing someone over onto the tracks and killing him. You are actually killing him yourself, you're pushing it with your own hand, you're pushing it and now it's different than steering. Something that is going to cause death in to another, you know. It doesn't really sound like. What's your name? Andrew Andrew. Let me ask you this question and yes, Suppose. Standing on the bridge next to the fat man, I didn't have to push him, suppose he were standing over a trapdoor that I could open by turning a steering wheel like that. Would you turn for some reason that I still just seems more raw, right? I mean, maybe if you accidentally like, leaned into the steering wheel, or something like that by Ty, or or say that the car is, is hurtling, towards the switch that will drop the Trap. Bent, but I can agree with that. It still seems wrong in a way that it doesn't seem to turn you say ball, directly with the situation in the second one. You're in a looker as well. All right. So you have the choice of becoming involved or not. Bye. Bye. In the fat up. Let's just forget for the moment about this case. That's good. Not to mention a different case. It's time. You're a doctor in an emergency room and 6 patients. Come to you. They've been in a terrible color. Car wreck Five of them sustained, moderate injuries, when is severely injured. You could spend all day caring for the one severely injured victim, but in that time to 5 would die, or you could look after the five, restore them to health, but during that time, the one severely injured person would die, how many would save the five? Now it's the doctor. How many would save the one? Very few people, just a handful of people. Same reason, I assume one life versus 5. Now, consider another doctor case. This time, you're a transplant surgeon and you have five patients each and desperate need of an organ transplant. In order to survive, one needs a heart. When a lung, when a kidney want to liver and the shift a pancreas And you have no organ, donors. You are about to see them die. And then it occurs to you that in the Next Room. There's a healthy guy who came in for a checkup. Andy's. You like that? He's taking a nap. You could go in very quietly. Yank out the five organs that person with die. But you can save the five. How many would do it? Anyone. How many put your hands up if you are doing? Anyone in the balcony. You would be careful, don't lean over too many what how many wouldn't? All right, what do you say? Speak up in the balcony? You, who would actually like to explore slightly alternate possibility of just taking the one of the five, who needs an organ, who dies first, using there, for healthy, organs to save the other for That's a pretty good idea. That's a great idea. except for the fact, Did you just wrecked the philosophical point? Well, let's, let's step back from the stories and he shall commence to notice a couple of things about the way. The arguments have begun to unfold. Certain moral principles have already begun to emerge. From the discussions we've had and let's consider what those moral principles. Look like the first moral principle that emerged in the discussion. The right thing to do the moral thing to do, depends on the consequences that will result. From your action. At the end of the day, better than five should live, even if one must die. That's an example of consequentialist moral reasoning. Consequentialist moral reasoning locates Morality In the consequences of an act in the state of the world. That will result from The Thing You Do. But then we went a little further, we consider those other cases and people weren't so sure about consequentialist moral reasoning. When people hesitated to push the fat, man over the bridge or to yank out, the organs of the innocent, patient people gestured toward reason, Having to do with the entrinsic quality of the act itself consequences, be what they met. People were reluctant People thought it was just wrong. Categorically wrong. To kill a person, an innocent person even for the sake of saving. Five lives. At least, people thought that in the second version of the story, We considered So this points to a second categorical way. I'm thinking about moral reasoning, categorical moral, reasoning, locates morality in certain absolute moral, requirement certain categorical duties and right, regardless of the consequences, We're going to explore in the days and weeks to come the contrast between consequentialist and categorical moral principles. The most influential example of consequential moral reasoning is utilitarianism a Doctrine invented by Jeremy Bentham. The 18th century English, political philosopher. The most important. Philosopher of categorical moral reasoning is the 18th century German philosopher Immanuel Kant. So we will look at those two different modes of moral reasoning, assess them and also consider others. You look at the syllabus, you'll notice that we read a number of great and famous books books by Aristotle. John Locke, Immanuel Kant, John, Stuart Mill, and others You'll notice to from the syllabus that, we don't only read these books. We also take up contemporary political and legal controversies, that raised philosophical questions. We will debate equality and inequalities affirmative action. Free Speech, verse jaded, speech, same-sex marriage, military conscription a range of practical questions. Why not just doing live on these abstract and distant books, but to make clear to bring out what's at stake in our everyday lives, including our political lives. Core philosophy. And so we will read these books and we will debate these issues and we'll see how each informs and illuminates. The other This may sound appealing enough but here, I have to issue a warning. And the warning is this. To read these books. In this way. as an exercise in self-knowledge to read them in this way, carries certain risks, Risks, that are both personal and political. Risks, that every student of political philosophy has known. These risks spring from the fact that philosophy teaches us and unsettles Us by confronting us with what we already know. There's an irony. The difficulty of this course, consists in the fact that it teaches what you already know. It works by taking what we know from familiar on question settings. And making it strange. That's how those examples work, work. The hypotheticals with which we began with their mix of playfulness and sobriety. It's also how these philosophical books, work philosophy, stranger size, From The Familiar not by supplying new information. but by inviting and provoking a new way of seeing But and here's the risk, once the familiar turns strange, it's never quite the same again. Self-knowledge. It's like Lost Innocence. However, I'm settling you find it. It can never be undone thought. Or unknown. What makes this Enterprise difficult? But also riveting. Is that moral and political philosophy is a story. And you don't know where the story will lead, but what you do know is that the story is about you. Those are the personal risk. now, what if the political risks One way of introducing a course, like this would be the promise you that by reading these books and debating these issues, you will become a better more responsible citizen. You will examine the presuppositions that public policy, you will put on your political judgment, you will become a more effective participant in public affairs. This would be a partial and misleading promise. Political philosophy for the most part hasn't work that way. You have to allow for the possibility. That political philosophy, may make you a worse citizen. Rather than a better one. Or at least the worst citizen before it makes you a better one. And that's because philosophy is a distancing even debilitating activity. And you see this going back to Socrates. There's a dialogue the gorgeous in which one of Socrates. His friends, pallet, please try to talk him out of philosophy. Calico. You tell Socrates philosophy is a pretty toy. If one indulges in it, with moderation at the right time of life, but if one pursues it further than one should, it is absolute ruin? Take my advice, Calico says, abandon argument active life, take for your models, not those people who spend their time on these Petty quibbles, but those who have a good livelihood and reputation and many other blessings to Socrates, Quit philosophizing get real. Go to Business School. And Calla Cleese did have a point. He had a point because philosophy distance is us from conventions, from establish assumptions and him settled beliefs. Those are the risks personal, and political in the face of these risks. There is a characteristic of Asian The name of the invasion is skepticism. It's the ideas that goes something like this. We didn't resolve once and for all. Either the cases or the principles we were arguing when we began. And if Aristotle and lock and cotton mill, haven't saw these questions. After all of these years, who are we to think? That we here in Sanders Theater, over the course of the semester can resolve them. Until maybe it's just a matter of Each person having his or her own principles and there's nothing more to be said about it. No way of reasoning. That's the evasion invasion of skepticism to which I would offer the following reply. It's true. These questions have been debated for a very long time, but the very fact that they have record and persisted Mesa Cafe. Pepto. They're impossible in one sense, they're unavoidable in another and the reason they're unavoidable. The reason they're inescapable is that we live some answer to these questions every day. So skepticism just throwing up your hands and giving up on Moro. Reflex. Is no solution. Immanuel Kant describe very well. The problem with skepticism when he wrote skepticism is a resting place for human reason where it can reflect upon its dogmatic wandering but it is known to welding place for Permanent Settlement Road can never suffice to overcome the restlessness of Reese. I tried to suggest to the stories and these arguments. Some tense of the risks and temptations of the perils in the possibilities. I would simply conclude by saying That the aim of this course is to awaken the restlessness of reason and to see where it might lead. Thank you very much. Like in the situation that desperate, you have to do what you have to do to survive, have to do what you have to do without any food, you know. So I'm going to have to take the sacrifice. I might have to make sacrifices and people can survive.Last time. We started out last time with some stories, with some moral dilemmas about trolley cars in about doctors and healthy patients, vulnerable to being victims of Oregon transplantation. We noticed two things about the arguments, we had One had to do with the way we were arguing. Begin with our judgments in particular cases, we tried to articulate the reasons for the principles. Line behind our judgments. And then confronted with a new case we found ourselves re-examining those principles. Revising each in the light of the other. And we noticed the built-in pressure to try to bring into alignment. Are judgments about particular cases and the principles we would endorse on reflection. We also noticed something about the substance of the arguments that emerged from the discussion. we noticed that sometimes we were tempted to locate the morality of an act, in the consequences in the results, in the state of the world, that it brought about And we call this consequentialist moral reasoning. but we also noticed that in some cases, we weren't swayed only by the result. Sometimes many of us fell and not just consequences, but also the intrinsic quality, or character, the ACT. Matarese morally. some people argue that there are certain things that are just categorically wrong even if they bring about a good result even if they say, five people at the cost of one life, So, we can crafted, consequentialist moral principles with categorical buns. Today, and in the next few days, we will begin to examine one of the most influential. Versions of consequentialist moral theory. And that's the philosophy of utilitarianism. Jeremy Bentham, the 18th century English political philosopher. Gave first the first clear. Systemic expression. To the utilitarian, moral theory. And bentham's idea. Is a central idea. It's a very simple one. With a lot of it morally, intuitive appeal been since idea is the following, the right thing to do. The just thing to do. Is to maximize. utility, what did he mean by utility He meant by utility the balance. Pleasure over pain. Happiness, over suffering. His how we arrived at the principle of maximizing utility. It started out by observing that all of us. All human beings are governed by to Sovereign Masters, pain and pleasure. We human beings. Like pleasure and dislike pain. And so we should base morality. Where they were thinking about what to do in our own lives or whether as legislators or citizens were thinking about what the law should be. The right thing to do individually or collectively. Is to maximize act in a way that maximizes the overall level of happiness. Benson's. Utilitarianism is sometimes summed up with the slogan, the greatest good for the greatest number. With this basic principle of utility on hand. Let's begin to test it and to examine it by turning to another case another story. But this time not a hypothetical story, a real life story, The Case of the queen versus Dudley and Stephens. This is a nineteenth-century British law case that famous And much debated in law schools. Here's what happened in the case. I'll summarize the story then. I want to hear How you would rule? Imagining that you are the jury. A newspaper account of the time, describe the background. Satyr story of disaster at Sea. This never told than that of the survivors of the yacht mignonette, the ship foundered in the South Atlantic 1300 miles from the cape. There were four in the crew. Dudley was the captain. Stevens was the first mate, Brooks was a sailor, man, of excellent character. Or so the newspaper account tells us The fourth crew member was the cabin, boy, Richard Parker, 17 years old. He was an orphan, he had no family. And he was on his first long Voyage at sea. He went the news account tells us rather against the advice of his friends. He went in the hopefulness of youthful ambition thinking the journey would make a man of him. Sadly it was not to be the facts of the case were not in dispute, the wave, hit the ship and the minion that went down. The four crew members escaped to a Lifeboat, the only food they had. We're two cans of preserved. Turnips, no fresh water. The first three days, they ain't nothing on the fourth day. They opened one of the cans of turnips and ate it. The next day, they caught a turtle. Together with the other can of turnips the turtle enabled them to subsist for the next few days and then 48 days, they had nothing, no food, no water. Imagine yourself in a situation like that, what would you do? Here's what they did. By now, the cabin boy Parker is lying at the bottom of the Lifeboat in the corner because he had drunk the seawater against the advice of the others and he had become ill and he appeared to be dying. Show on the 19th day. Dudley the captain suggested that they should all have a lottery that they should draw. Lots to see who would die to save the rest. Brooks refused. He didn't like the lottery idea. We don't know whether this was because he didn't want to take the chance or because he believed in categorical, moral principles, but in any case, no, Lots were drawn. The next day, there was still no shipping side. So Dudley told Brooks to avert his gaze, and he motion to Stevens that the boy Parker had better be killed. They offered a prayer. He told the boy his time to come and he killed him with a pen. Knife, stabbing him. In the jugular vein. Brooks emerged from his conscientious objection to share in the gruesome bounty. for 4 days, the three of them Chad on the body and blood of the cabin boy, True story. And then they were rescued. Dudley describes their rescue. In his diary with staggering euphemism quote on the 24th day as we were having our breakfast. A ship appeared at last. The three survivors were picked up by a German ship. They were taken back to Falmouth in England where they were arrested and tried. Brooks turned State's witness Dudley Stephens went to trial. They didn't dispute. The fact they claimed they had acted out of necessity that was their defense. They argued in effect better that one should die so that three could survive The prosecutor. Wasn't swayed by that argument. He said murder is murder until the case went to trial. Now, imagine you on the jury and just to simplify the discussion. Put aside the question of law. Let's assume that you is the jury. Are charged with deciding whether what they did was morally permissible or not. How many? Would vote. Not guilty. That what they did was morally permissible. And how many would vote guilty, but they did was morally wrong. A pretty sizeable majority. Now, let's see what people's reasons are. And let me begin with those who are in the minority. Let's hear first, from the defense, I've got Leanne Stevens. Why would you Marley exonerate? What are your reasons? Yes. I think it's I think it is morally reprehensible, but I think that there is a distinction between was morally reprehensible and what makes someone legally accountable in other words? Cena as the judge said, what's what's always moral? Isn't necessarily against the wall and while I don't think that necessity justifies theft or murder or any illegal activity, some point your degree of necessity. Dozen fact, exonerate you from any guilt? Okay, good. Other Defenders, other voices for the defense. Moral justification for what they did. Yes. I think I just feel like in the situation that desperate, you have to do what you have to do to survive days without any food. You know, someone just have to take the sacrifice. Someone has to make sacrifices in and people can survive. And furthermore, from that they say they survived, and then they become productive members of society who go home and start like a million charity organizations in this and that and this and that I mean a benefit everybody. And then I mean I don't know what they did is they might have gone in like kill more people or whatever but but if they were us went home and they turned out to be assassins and they weren't going home and turned out to be a assassin. Well, okay, we've heard it offends couple voices for the defense. Now we need to hear from the prosecution. Most people think. What they did was wrong, why? Yes, one of the first things that I was thinking was, if they haven't been eating for a really long time, maybe they are mentally like affected and so is that what that could be used as a defense of possible argument that they weren't in the proper state of mind? They weren't making decisions, they might not otherwise be making. And if that's an appealing argument that that do you have to be in an altered mindset to do something like that? It suggests that People who find that argument convincing, do you think that they were acting and recorded? I want to know what you think. You defend the music. I'm Sorry, Charlie appropriate way. And what do you say? He was Marcus. He just defended them. He said, you heard what he said, what you got to do, and it tastes like that. What do you say? But in that there's no situation that would allow human beings to take. The idea of state or that the other people's lives in their own hands that we don't have that kind of power. Who else? What do you say? I'm wondering if Richard Parker's consent in, you know, dying, that would exonerate them from from an act of murder. And if so is that still morally justifiable just wait. Wait, hang on, what's your name? So and hand men, instead of the prayer or before the prayer he says, Parker, would you mind? We're desperately hungry. As markets, a empathizes with desperately hungry. You're not going to last long, anyhow. Would you be a martyr? How about it? Parker. Then. Then what do you think? Would it be morally testified? Then it supposed to be in his semi super that, okay? I don't think it would be morally justifiable, but I'm 17, even though it would be morally Justified are there people who think. Who want to take up, Kathleen's consent idea and who thinks that that would make it morally Justified? Raise your hand. If it would, if you think it would That's very interesting. Why would consent make a moral difference? Why would it? Yes, I do think that if he was making his own original idea and it was his idea to start with, then that would be the only situation in which I would see it being appropriate and anyway because that way you couldn't make the argument that he was pressured, you know, it's 3 to 1 or whatever. The reason why I think that if he was making a decision to give his life and he took on the agency to sacrifice himself with some people might see as admirable and other people might disagree with that decision. so, if he came up with the idea, That's the only kind of consent. We could have confidence in Marley then it would be okay. Otherwise, It would be kind, of course consent under the circumstances you think. Is there anyone who thinks that even the consent of Parker would not justify? They're killing him. Who thinks that? Yes, tell us why stand up Parker will be killed with the hope that the other crew members will be rescued. So there's no definite reason that he should be killed because you don't know who wins they're going to get rescue. So if you kill him, instead of him in pain, do you keep telling the crew member until you're rescued? And then you're left with no one cuz I was going to die. Eventually will the moral logic of the situation seems to be that that they would keep on picking off the weakest? Maybe one by one. Until they were rescued. And in this case, luckily, they were rescued 13 at least we're still alive. Now if if Parker didn't give his consent, would it be alright to do you think or not? I believe is morally incorrect. So should be any human anyway. So I'm waiting until someone died. Still, it would be objectionable. It all depends on one's personal morals. And like, we can't sit here. And just like, this is just my opinion. Of course, other people are going to disagree, but if they have reasons that can persuade you or not, let's try that. Let some now, is there someone Who can explain those of you who are tempted by consent. Can you explain why consent makes such a moral different? What about the lottery idea? Does that count as consent? Remember at the beginning? It was the lottery suppose that they had agreed to a lottery. Then how many would then say, It was all right, Suppose there were Lottery Cabin Boy Lost, and the rest of the story. And folded, then how many people would say it was morally permissible? So the numbers are rising, if we had a lottery, let's hear from one of you for whom the lottery would make a moral difference. Why would it? I think the essential element in my mind that makes it a crime is the idea that they decided at some point that their lives were more important than his. And that I mean that's kind of the basis for really any crime, right? It's like my needs. My desires are more important than yours and mine. Take president and if they had been a lottery where everyone consented that someone should die and it's sort of like they're all sacrificing themselves to save the rest, then it would be all right, a little grotesque but But morally permissible, and what's your name? So Matt for you? What bothers you is not the cannibalism, but the lack of due process. I can't even say that, right? And can someone who agrees with Matt Say a little bit more about why a lottery. Would make it in your view. Morally permissible. Go ahead. Understood it originally, was it? That was a whole issue is that the cabin boy was never consulted about whether or not something was going to happen to him, even though it with the original Lottery whether or not he would be a part of that it was just decided that he was the one that was going to die because then everyone knows that there's going to be a death. Whereas, you know, they haven't we didn't know that this discussion was even happening. There was no uniform, warning for him to know that. Hey, I may be the one to die. All right. Suppose? He everyone agrees to the lottery, they have the lottery, The Cabin Boy lose his and he changes his mind. You've already decided. It was made, you know, if you know that you're dying for the, you know, the reasons for others to live you would, if someone else who died, you know, that you would consume them. So that's good. But I, but then he could say, I know, but I lost I just think the best, the whole moral issue is that there was no Consulting of the cabin boy in that. That's what makes it the most horrible is that he had no idea what was even going on that. Had he known what was going on on? It would Be a bit more understandable right now, I want to hear. So there are some who think It's morally permissible, but only about 20%. Led by Marcus. Then there are some who say the real problem. Here is the lack of consent. Whether the lack of consent to a lottery to a fair procedure. Or Kathleen's idea, lack of consent at the moment. A death. And if we add consent, Then more people are willing to consider the sacrifice morally Justified. I want to hear. Now, finally, from those of you who think even with consent, even with a lottery, even with a final murmur of consent by Parker at the very last moment, it would still be wrong. And why would it be wrong? That's what I want to hear. Yes, the whole time. I've been leaning towards the categorical, moral reasoning and I think that There's a possibility, I'd be okay with the idea of a lottery and then the loser taking into their own hands to kill themselves. So they wouldn't be, you know, an active murder. But I still think that even that way it's coarse and also I don't think that there is any remorse I can Dudley's. Diary we are eating our breakfast. It seems as though he's just a reply, you know they're not Valley on someone else's life so that makes me feel like I have to take the categorical so all right. Good other any other Defenders of a without consent. Yes, murders murder in in every way in our side it looks at murdered downtown on it and say why? And I don't think it's any different any case, let me ask you a question. The one, the cabin boy, he had no family. He had no dependents. These other three had families. Back home in England. They had dependents, they had wives and children. Think back to Benton Benton says, we have to consider the welfare of a utility, the happiness of everybody. We have to add it all up so it's not just number three, against one. It's also all of those people at home. Impact a London newspaper at the time and popular opinion. Sympathize with him. Saint Stephen's in the paper said, if they weren't motivated by affection and concern for their loved ones at home and their dependents, surely, they wouldn't have done that. And how is that any different from people on the corner trying to die with the same desire to feed their family? I don't think it's any different. I think in any case if I if I'm murdering you that's murder and I think that we should look at all. On the same life instead of criminalizing a certain activities and in and making certain things seem more violence, Savage went into the same case is all the same, saw the same act and mentally that goes in the murderer, decides if you feed your family, so supposed to 3, it's supposed to wear 30. 301 life to save 300. Or in Wartime. 3000 supposed to say the right thing to do is to add shop, the collective happiness, you think is wrong about that. I don't think is wrong but I think murder is murder in any case. all right, let's get back from this discussion and notice how many objections have we heard to update? Did we heard some defenses of what they did? The defense has had to do with necessity, their dire circumstance and Implicitly, at least the idea that numbers matter. And not only numbers matter but the wider effects matter their family back home, their dependents park, it was an orphan, no one would miss him. So if you add up, if you try to calculate the balance of happiness and suffering, You might have a case for saying what they did was the right thing. Then we heard at least three different types of objections. We heard an objection that said what they did was categorically wrong like here at the end categorically wrong murder is murder is always wrong. Even if it increases your overall happiness of society, a categorical, a patch. But we still need to investigate. Why murder is categorically wrong. Is it? Because even cabin boys have certain, fundamental rights and if that's the reason, Where do those rights come from? If not from some idea of the larger welfare, or utility or happiness. Question number one, other said, A lottery would make a difference. Affair procedure that said, but, and some people were swayed by that. That's not a categorical objection. Exactly. It's saying. Everybody has to be counted as an equal. Even though at the end of the day, one can be sacrificed for the general welfare. That leaves us with another question to investigate? Why does agreement to a certain procedure? Even a fair procedure, justify whatever result clothes from the operation that procedure. Question number two. A question. Number 3, the basic idea of consent Kathleen. Got us onto this. Hit the cabin. Boy had agreed himself. And not under duress as was added. Then it would be all right to take his life to save the rest. And even more people signed on to that idea. But that raises a third philosophical question, what is the moral work? That consent does? Why does an act of consent? Make such a moral difference that an act, that would be wrong taking a life without consent is morally permissible with consent. To investigate those three questions. We're going to have to read some philosophers and starting next time, we're going to read Bentham and John Stuart Mill. Utilitarianism lost purse. Don't miss the chance to interact online. With other viewers adjusted join the conversation. Take a punk with watch lectures, you miss and learn a lot more. Is it just as harbor.org? It's the right thing to do. funding for this program, is provided by Additional funding provided by.